CO2 cleaning notes


general parameters

A CO2 cylinder at room temperature has a pressure of 830 psi, and the gas and liquid within the
cylinder are in thermodynamic equilibrium


Overview 

The expansion of carbon dioxide through an orifice is a constant enthalpy process. Therefore, as the pressure drops in an orifice, the thermodynamic state just moves down the enthalpy lines vertically.
https://emersonclimate.files.wordpress.com/2015/04/co2-post-3-figure-2.jpg
∆H = ∆U + ∆(PV)

With a gas fed source, the initial state is at point A and as the pressure drops, liquid droplets nucleate and become an increasingly larger percentage of the mixture. At the interface between the liquid-gas and gas-solid regions, all the liquid is converted to solid and the percentage of the solid is determined by the lever rule(c). A rough percentage gives about 5 % dry ice, the remainder gas. With a liquid fed source, the initial state is at “B” and as the pressure drops, gas is formed and the percentage of gas increases until the gas-solid boundary is met. Here, the remaining liquid is transformed into solid and the relative percentage of snow is 45 to SO%. Continuing pressure drops leads to no major changes in the relative percentages in the two phases. The percentage of snow is dependent only on the initial phase, either liquid or gas and also the pressure and temperature

The mechanism for particle removal involves a combination of forces related to a moving high velocity gas and momentum transfer between the snow particles and surface contamination. The mechanism for organic contamination removal requires the presence of a liquid carbon dioxide phase during impact.Liquid carbon dioxide is an excellent solvent for hydrocarbons and other non polar substances.

Generally, a high velocity flowing gas can remove larger particulates from a surface. The moving gas (considered a fluid) exerts an aerodynamic drag force on the surface particle population and the magnitude of this force is proportional to the particle’s area (diameter squared). If the drag force exceeds the surface adhesion force, particle removal occurs and the particle is carried away with the moving gas flow. The surface adhesion forces - van der Walls, capillary condensation, dipole attraction - vary with the diameter of the particle. Aerodynamic drag forces can remove larger particles, but as the contaminant diameter decreases, the aerodynamic drag force decreases much faster than the surface adhesive forces. Therefore, as the diameter of the contaminant reduces, the surface adhesion forces tend to dominate and the flowing gas can not overcome these adhesive forces. This cross over is typically in the micron and larger range.

With the addition of dry ice particles to the flowing gas stream, a new process is available for particle removal. This process is schematically shown in Figure 4 where the particle on the surface is impacted by an impinging dry ice snow particle. The impact implies a transfer of momentum between the snow and surface contaminant and this transfer of momentum can overcome the surface adhesive forces. Once liberated from the surface, the contaminants are easily carried away with the high velocity gas stream. Particle removal efficiencies do not decrease for smaller surface particulate sizes as in the case for the aerodynamic drag force. Further, the ability to remove surface contamination by momentum transfer appears to be independent of surface contaminant size as long as the CO2 snow size is not much smaller than the surface contaminant.

Cleaning with carbon dioxide can be done by three different methods -- (i) macroscopic dry ice pellets; (ii) snow streams based upon single or double expansion of carbon dioxide and spraying the sample with either microscopic or macroscopic “snow” particles; and (iii) supercritical fluid carbon dioxide (SFC).

Nozzles for carbon dioxide cleaning involve either a single or double expansion arrangement. The simplest nozzles are the single expansion nozzles with one orifice. Effective single expansion nozzles are variations on the Venturi orifice design with the exit size usually being elongated with respect to the input side. An example is shown in Figure 6. The exit size is more typically a nosecone and this chamber is where the dry ice nucleates, Its angle and length play an important role in determining the velocity of the stream and the snow size. Another design of single expansion nozzles involves the use of a variable orifice with different choice for nosecone geometry. Increasing the angle of the nose cone yields increases in snow flake size at the expense of stream velocity. Eventually, this trade off results in poor organic removal.

Double expansion nozzles, shown schematically in Figure 7, offer another way to control dry ice size and velocity. The first orifice gives an initial pressure drop and takes the CO2 feed from the phase boundary, either point A or B in Figure 3, into the two phase liquid - gas region. Here, for a gas fed unit and in the coalescing chamber, small liquid droplets nucleate and the size of these particles is related to the choice of first orifice. The liquid droplets travel down the chamber and enter the second orifice, a diameter larger than the first. Upon exiting, the final pressure drop converts all the liquid droplets into dry ice particles. Velocity and snow size are influenced by the design of the second expansion nozzle. The nozzles described above are point sources and can clean about a l/4 inch diameter. A challenge in CO2 snow cleaning nozzle design was to devise a nozzle that can generate snow over a large linear distance. Layden(7) introduced large area double expansion nozzles and made units ranging from l/2 inch to over 28 inches in length. Further, these nozzles can operate with either liquid or gaseous carbon dioxide feeds. Two examples of this large area nozzle are shown in Fig 8. One nozzle is 2 inches, the other is 12 inches. To seal these two plates, a complex seal of 1 mil thickness was designed. The seal has a set of channels per linear inch and the channel width is dependent on the feed source. These large area, or flat nozzles, were used in generating the cleaning application related to cleanroom and process equipment. Adams redesigned the flat nozzle to remove the thin seal material and instead used a seal variation of the UHV conflat knife edges. Flat nozzles from l/2 inch to over 8 inches have been made for various applications.


Proof of Process (removing micron and submicron particles)

Light Microscopy

Particle Counting

Scanning Electron Microscopy (SEM)

Energy Dispersive Spectroscopy (EDS) within an SEM allows for elemental identification of individual particles
Microprobe

X-ray Photoelectron Spectroscopy (XPS) and Auger electron Spectroscopy are surface analysis methods capable of measuring all elements (except H and He) present on and within the first few atomic layers of a surface

Mass Spectroscopy


Joule Thompson experiment 
inversion temperature function of pressure
if T1 is above the iversion temperature the final T2 will be higher than T1
if T1 is below the iversion temperature the final T2 will be lower than T1
Joule-Thomson coefficient positive-cooling, negative-heating
CO2 -107.14 Katm^-1 source: 
	Comparative evaluation of the Joule-Thomson coefficient for CO2(g) and N2(g)
	distributed by air liquide PLC, Onitsha Anambra State, Nigeria
	P. N. Ekemezie, P. A. C. Okoye and J. O. Nwadiogbu
	

Chiller - water exits 
	0.24 MPa (34.8 psi), 23 L/min (6.1 gpm) to .32 MPa (46.4 psi), 28 L/min (7.4 gpm) 10 C

GB - from 300 psi out of CO2 tank to 850 psi

GAM - Gas Apmplifier Module 830 to 1250 psi, high pressure CO2

SGM - Snow Generating Module, high velocity, supercritical low pressure CO2, lowers temperature of CO2

PPM - Propellant Pressure Matrix