notes

GNA staff labor - getting familiar with reliabotics operations


Zeroth law of thermodynamics - If two systems are in thermal equilibrium independently with a third system, they must be in thermal equilibrium with each other. This law helps define the notion of temperature.

First law of thermodynamics - When energy passes, as work, as heat, or with matter, into or out from a system, its internal energy changes in accord with the law of conservation of energy. Equivalently, perpetual motion machines of the first kind are impossible.

Second law of thermodynamics - In a natural thermodynamic process, the sum of the entropies of the interacting thermodynamic systems increases. Equivalently, perpetual motion machines of the second kind are impossible.

Third law of thermodynamics - The entropy of a system approaches a constant value as the temperature approaches absolute zero. With the exception of non-crystalline solids (glasses) the entropy of a system at absolute zero is typically close to zero, and is equal to the logarithm of the multiplicity of the quantum ground states.

Entropy - a thermodynamic quantity representing the unavailability of a system's thermal energy for conversion into mechanical work, often interpreted as the degree of disorder or randomness in the system.

Enthalpy - a measurement of energy in a thermodynamic system. It includes the internal energy, which is the energy required to create a system, and the amount of energy required to make room for it by displacing its environment and establishing its volume and pressure.
(H = U + PV)


AC

compressor - high pressure, high temperature, gas

condenser - high pressure, lowers temperature with fan, gas to liquid

expansion valve - high pressure to low pressure, low temperature, liquid to gas

evaporator - low pressure, low temperature, gas


Octopuz lesense:
0CB14-5K5UA-184T6-7


SolidWorks Flow Simulation tutorial:
https://youtu.be/xyU5Yvg7gL8

850 CFM
